| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.089** |**HHCC Classification Code:  5.01-3**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Dec. 10, 2003

##### Group:
5.01 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Compressors - Household

##### Description:
An early, crude compressor, possibly part of the earliest commercial production by Kelvinator marketed in Canada. Like the Frigo-Matic [see #087 and 088] it marks the earliest, embryonic years of the Canadian refrigeration industry. It too would be tentatively accepted into Canadian households in the mid 1920's with much trepidation and often discomfort. It brought new noises, foreign to home life and often the odour of sulphur dioxide throughout the household, as well as frequent visits from the refrigeration serviceman, 1926

##### Film Image:
C14-17

##### Digital Image:
CD8-54

##### Make:
Possibly Kelvinator of Canada, reminiscent of their Model J production in the latter part of the 1920's

##### Manufacturer:
See above

##### Model:
Body casting markings: G; D-2181; 5335

##### Serial No.:


##### Size:
14x8x16'h

##### Weight:
35 lbs.

##### Circa:
1926

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating the crude beginnings of the Canadian refrigeration industry, as well as the design concepts and construction of refrigeration compressors, destined to change the way Canadians would live out their lives.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:


##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
Composite  Kelvinator Manual, T. H. Oliver Collection

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

