| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.052** |**HHCC Classification Code:  4.02-14**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Nov 13, 2003

##### Group:
4.02 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Condensing Units - Commercial

##### Description:
A truly remarkable statement of its social and cultural times, as well as the evolutionary stage of refrigeration machine technology in Canada, in the second decade of the 20th century. Crafted as the embodiment, and the ultimate statement of the early 20th century 'machine', it was a mechanical wonder in every respect. From its massive 200lbs, to its crude 1 ' inch angle iron frame, its lumbering 370 RPM compressor, its hefty, automatic pressure control with leavers, weights and springs, fashioned in cast iron, steel and brass, and the constant odour of sulphur dioxide, it would be a nightmare for the mechanics of the time, as they struggled to learn new trade, Frigidaire, circa 1928.

##### Film Image:
CD 14-5, -6

##### Digital Image:
CD8-42, -43

##### Make:
Frigidaire

##### Manufacturer:
Frigidaire Corporation, Dayton Ohio

##### Model:
N

##### Serial No.:
655417-N

##### Size:
32x 16x 20'h

##### Weight:
200 lbs

##### Circa:
1928

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, demonstrating the form and structure of some of the earliest refrigeration machinery in Canada.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:


##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:
Heavily pitted from years of use and misuse in damp and highly acidic, atmosphere produced by leaking sulphur dioxide refrigerant vapour.

##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
Frigidaire Manual, SER405, products mfd prior to 1937, P9 and 15, Chpt. 1-A

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

