| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.119** |**HHCC Classification Code:  5.02-13**|
| ----------- | ----------- |
##### Description:
AN INTEGRAL HP COMPRESSOR (2 TO 3 HP), BY FRIGIDAIRE, POSSIBLY PART OF THEIR MODEL R SERIES, CIRCA 1942 ' it would also be part of the company's new generation of open system refrigeration compressors for F12 refrigerant, which began to emerge in the late 1930's [see also #117]. With a 17 inch, twin V belt fly wheel, in formed and riveted steel plate, it also followed the slow speed, high displacement compressor design preferred by Frigidaire in the period, and would come to stand as an historic marker of the end of an epic era in refrigeration machinery engineering.
##### Group:
5.02 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Compressors - Commercial

##### Make:
Frigidaire

##### Manufacturer:
Frigidair Div. General Motors Corporation

##### Model:
6R (see note)

##### Serial No.:
Body markings: R; 5-9; 1; 633263; 3; -16R; 22; W633272; 620260

##### Size:
17x14x18'h

##### Weight:
90 lbs.

##### Circa:
1942

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating the new generation of open system, slow speed refrigeration compressors for F12 refrigerant, which began to emerge in the late 1930's, with a 17 inch, twin V belt fly wheel, an historic marker of the end of an epic era in refrigeration machinery engineering.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:


##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories:


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
Frigidaire, Master Parts and Price Catalogue, Jan 1940. Compressor Parts, Page 2

##### Notes:
The machine markings are ambiguous, as is often the case, historically, with embossed equipment part numbers mixed up with model and serial data. The 'R' designation is present, corresponding to a recognised type, shown in the company's master parts and price catalogue, Jan 1940.

##### Related Reports:

