| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.097** |**HHCC Classification Code:  5.01-10**|
| ----------- | ----------- |
##### Description:
CHIEFTAIN MID 20TH CENTURY,REPLACEMENT COMPRESSOR, TECUMSEH PRODUCTS, 1949: A single cylinder, FHP, open market, general replacement refrigeration compressor of the late 1940's, heavily marked throughout the trade as a replacement for worn out original equipment, much of it by now 10 to 20 years into its life cycle. With vastly reduced size and weight, with forced feed lubrication, it was the result of superior engineering and much more precise manufacturing processes, than those 2 decades earlier. Many refrigeration machines bearing the names of Kelvinator and Frigidaire would live out their latter years with a Chieftain compressor upgrade.
##### Group:
5.01 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Compressors - Household

##### Make:
Chieftain

##### Manufacturer:
Tecumseh Products, Tecumseh Mich.

##### Model:
500

##### Serial No.:
1-17-49

##### Size:
8x8x10'h

##### Weight:
28 lbs.

##### Circa:
1949

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating the significant advancement in refrigeration compressor engineering by the end of the first half of the 20th century, with vastly reduced size and weight and with superior performance.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:


##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories:


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
RESCO Refrigeration Supply Co Ltd., London Ont. Catalogue 1951, T.H. Oliver collection

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports:

