| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.078** |**HHCC Classification Code:  8.03-4**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Dec 8, 2003

##### Group:
8.03 Other Refrigerating and Air conditioning Components and Parts - NEC

##### Description:
Getting those 300 to 400 lb. Cabinet refrigeration machines to the homeowner safely and undamaged was a challenge of its own for the booming Canadian refrigeration industry of the 1930's and 40's. With 3 ply, 3/16' plywood crates, and panels hand nailed to ' x 1 '' framing, bolted to heavy, hard wood pallet, the crates bore large ink stamped, promotional lettering. The crating strategy was intended not only to protect, but also to let neighbours know just what was being un-crated on the porch next door, variously 1936 to 1948:
Kelvinator, London Ont., Model EC1, Serial 73274, 25 cycle, 
Kelvinator, London Ont., Serial 37574, 
Norge, Rolator, Borg-warner, Detroit Mich.,
McClary, General Steel Wares, Montreal, Toronto, London, cabinet Serial 50190, unit serial T51430, Made by Waterloo Plywood Ltd., Waterloo Ont, with shipping tag to T. H. Oliver Aurora Ont.     
McClary, General Steel Wares, Montreal, Toronto, London.

##### Film Image:


##### Digital Image:
CD 11-8.03-4(a,b,c,etc.)

##### Make:
Various makes and manufacturers

##### Manufacturer:


##### Model:


##### Serial No.:


##### Size:
Approximately 34 x 1x 62 ' h, each panel

##### Weight:
10 lbs., each panel

##### Circa:
1936 to 1948

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating the crating, transportation and promotional methods employed by the Canadian refrigeration industry in its early growth and development years, when cabinet refrigerators for the home where heavy pieces of domestic machinery.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:


##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:
A substantial crating industry developed in the 1930 and 40's in Ontario to support the rapidly developing home appliance industry. Based on wood, much of the industry centred in Western Ontario.

##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:


##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

