| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.059** |**HHCC Classification Code:  4.02-21**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Nov. 14, 2003

##### Group:
4.02 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Condensing Units - Commercial

##### Description:
Applications engineering, like the science and technology it depend on for inspiration, is moved from time to time by creative new ideas, ones that fundamentally alter traditional approaches. The idea of engineering a refrigeration machine in which the compressor is placed on top of the motor, instead of beside it, in order to better fit the space available in a self-contained refrigerated fixture, is just such an inspirational idea, here by a small Ontario company in its distinctive orange, Robert Elder Ltd. Toronto, 1956

##### Film Image:
CD 14-7

##### Digital Image:
CD8-44

##### Make:
Frost Master

##### Manufacturer:
Robert Elder Ltd., Toronto

##### Model:
DC25P

##### Serial No.:
C16385

##### Size:
10x 18x 22'h

##### Weight:
100 lbs

##### Circa:
1956

##### Rating:
Education, and research quality demonstrating innovative contribution by a small Ontario based refrigeration equipment manufacturer to better adapt the traditional refrigeration condensing units to fit the needs of fixture manufacturers, for example chest freezers and self-contained display cases. Condenser not included

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:
Chieftain 2 cylinder compressor
' HP RI motor, Leland Electric, Quelph Ont.

##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:
Robert Elder, like Gilson [see item #056], both small Ontario niche manufactures, sought to differentiate themselves with unique, colours, daring to be different, separating themselves from the pack. The effect was to create quite a different corporate culture and image.

##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:


##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

