| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.094** |**HHCC Classification Code:  5.01-7**|
| ----------- | ----------- |
##### Description:
The 1920's and 30's was as a period extra-ordinarily obsessed with the promise of the piston and the reciprocating machine, whether manifest in the steam or internal combustion engine or in the refrigeration compressor. Inventors were constantly at work attempting to improve its performance, while reducing its cost. In the refrigeration industry inventors and start-up companies worked assiduously, producing a wide range of engineering designs and market options, which together would significantly alter the lives of Canadians. With many distinguishing features, this early, petit, light weigh, unusual compressor design is by the Brunner Manufacturing Co. of Utica N.Y., circa 1927  [See also #057, item 402-19]
##### Group:
5.01 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Compressors - Household

##### Make:
Brunner

##### Manufacturer:
Brunner Manufacturing Co. of Utica N.Y.

##### Model:
Unknown

##### Serial No.:


##### Size:
8x9x12'h

##### Weight:
28 lbs.

##### Circa:
1927

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating wide range of options in the design and construction of refrigeration compressors by the late 1920's, each with its own unique features and operating characteristics

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:
light weight alloy crank case
small compact design
unique service port design
Brunner, characteristic, in-board, shaft seal assembly

##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories:


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
Household Refrigeration, H. R. Hull, Nickerson, 4th edition 1932,  Page 306, T. H. Oliver Collection

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports:

