| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.060** |**HHCC Classification Code:  6.02-1**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Nov. 25, 2003

##### Group:
6.02 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Condensers and Receivers - Commercial

##### Description:
An historic, elemental, coiled tube, static refrigerant condenser assembly, by Frigidaire, from the early years of the low pressure, commercial refrigeration industry in Canada - originally used on Frigidaire model K, cabinet style, condensing unit, using SO2 refrigerant, see Item #051, code 4.02-13. The company later produced a modernisation kits to convert these S02 machines to forced air, tube and fin, radiator style condensing, See code 6.02-5,  Frigidaire 1929

##### Film Image:
CD 15-32

##### Digital Image:
CD 8-106

##### Make:
Frigidaire

##### Manufacturer:
Frigidaire Electric Refrigeration Products, General motors  Corporation

##### Model:
Model K condenser assembly

##### Serial No.:


##### Size:
only round coil 12'dia x 6' h x11 coils
only oval coils 11'x 2'x 16'h x 34 coils 
Over all structure 16x 12x 24'h

##### Weight:
28 lbs

##### Circa:
1929

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, demonstrating the form and structure of early, elimental, coiled tube refrigerant condensers built for fractional horsepower, commercial application, refrigeration machines in Canada.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:
Coiled ' ' and 3/3' coiled copper tubing on high gloss. black enamelled, steel sandwich style supporting frame

##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
Frigidaire Manual, SER405, products mfd prior to 1937, P9 and 15, Chpt. 1-A

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

