| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.074** |**HHCC Classification Code:  8.02-2**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Dec. 4, 2003

##### Group:
8.02 Other Refrigerating and Air conditioning Components and Parts - Commercial

##### Description:
An assembly of historic, open system, reciprocating, refrigeration compressor parts, for small, commercial refrigeration applications, many parts in their original cartons. Including valve plates and valves, demonstrating what they are; what they do; and how they worked in grocery stores, bakeshops, confectioneries and institutions in Canada in the 1920's to 1940's Various manufacturers, circa 1948

[For additional compressor parts see also items 8.02-1, 8.01-1 and 2]

##### Film Image:


##### Digital Image:


##### Make:


##### Manufacturer:
Various manufacturers, including Kelvinator, Frigidaire, Chieftain/Tecumseh, Brunner

##### Model:


##### Serial No.:


##### Size:
Approximately 40 pieces

##### Weight:
50 lbs.

##### Circa:
1948

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, demonstrating the workings parts of reciprocating, refrigeration compressors employed in small commercial applications in Canadian in the 1920's to 40's: what they are; what they did; and how they worked. Also provides for the restoration and rehabilitation of historic compressors.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:


##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:


##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:


##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

