| **HHCC Accession No. 2003.057** |**HHCC Classification Code:  4.02-19**|
| ----------- | ----------- |
##### Description:
A classic piece of mid 20th century, Toronto built, heavy duty, no nonsense, open-system, refrigeration machinery by a Canadian manufacture, well recognised for its unique Canadian engineering solutions and contributions to commercial and industrial refrigeration process applications, Brunner, 1952.
##### Group:
4.02 Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Condensing Units - Commercial

##### Make:
Brunner

##### Manufacturer:
Brunner Corporation, Canada, Ltd.

##### Model:
A18FC

##### Serial No.:
140376

##### Size:
19x 15x 12'h

##### Weight:
125 Lbs

##### Circa:
1952

##### Rating:
Education, and research quality demonstrating the no nonsense products, unique engineering solutions and contributions by one of Canada's pre-eminent refrigeration engineering equipment manufacturers of the 20th century

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:
2 Cylinder compressor, #140376
heavy duty 2 pass forced air condenser
' Hp Delco motor, capacitor start, high torque, rubber mount by Mckinnon Industries St Catherines Ont.

##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:
Unique system of belt tightening designed and built by Brunner

##### Accessories:


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:


##### Industrial Significance:
Canada had many small companies spring up in the middle years of the 20th century to participate in the boom years of the industry. Most had modest ambitions and resources, and were satisfied by building a modest range of equipment. Brunner was an exception, building small fractional horsepower, open-system machines, as demonstrated here, as well as engineering and building large systems up to 100 HP or more.

##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:


##### Notes:


##### Related Reports:

