| **HHCC Accession No. 2006.186** |**HHCC Classification Code:  16.01-16**|
| ----------- | ----------- |

##### Last Modified:
Nov 26, 2005

##### Group:
16.01 Electric Motors - Single Phase, Repulsion Induction

##### Description:
An early mid 20th century, classic 1 1/2 HP, 25 cycle, repulsion induction, single phase motor, escaping frequency standardization in 1948, employing FHP technology extended to cover motors in the integral HP range, making possible larger capacity refrigeration and air conditioning applications in areas not served by industrial three-phase power, Wagner, new and un-used, Circa 1947.

##### Film Image:
NIL

##### Digital Image:
CD 11-16.01-16

##### Make:
Wagner

##### Manufacturer:
Wagner Electric Mfg. Co. of Canada Ltd., Div. of Sangamo Co., Ltd. Leaside Ont.

##### Model:
ZL44BF2346, Type RA

##### Serial No.:
193222

##### Size:
21 x 11 x 11'h

##### Weight:
120 lbs.

##### Circa:
1947

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating the engineering and construction of an early mid 20th century, single phase, 25 cycle, Canadian made, repulsion induction motor with integral HP capacity, new and un-used.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once a rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to be come a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology. 

New stock held by T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Elecrtic at the time of frequency standardization in Ontario, 1948

With original manufacturers warranty card and instructions

##### Type and Design:
Early mid 20th century, heavy duty, repulsion induction, commutating motor,
Rigid 4 bolt base plate
Classic Wagner centrifugal brush lifting, armature short circuiting mechanism 
11/2 HP
Dual voltage, 110-220 volts
Bronze sleeve bearings with wick oilers
Steel ferro-magnetic body

##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:
Original manufacturers warranty card and instructions

##### Accessories


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:
An artifact of Canadian history telling many stories of life and times, including Canadian technological innovation, dissemination and popularization of electro-motive and refrigeration technology, including:
Witnessing the engineering achievement and wide spread application of elegant and affordable, FHP repulsion induction motor technology by the mid 20th century.
The successful adaptation of FHP, single phase, repulsion induction motor technology to integral HP applications, typically 1, 1 1/2, 2, 3, and 5 HP. 
The installation of refrigeration and air conditioning equipment in  areas not served by three-phase power. As a result low pressure refrigeration system applications grew rapidly in the pre W.W.II years and beyond, including small cold storage plants, large food stores, food processing applications and ice cream making, etc.
One of Canada's truly remarkable, mega-engineering projects of the 20th century, frequency standardization in Ontario a massive, multi-million dollar undertaking affecting every corner and crevice of life in Ontario.   
Repulsion induction motor technology was above all a marvel of its time, a technology born of both science and the consumer market place, a classic formula for the innovation and diffusion of popular technology, throughout the balance of the 20th century and on in to the 21st. Scientifically, the work of Faraday and many others laid much of the theoretical foundations for electromagnetic devices, the marvel of the early 20th century [much in the same way digital devices became the marvel of the early years of the 21st]. The wonders made possible by alternating current energised, rotating magnetic fields and the electric and magnetic circuitry that made them possible would soon be exploited by those interested in their application in applied electro-motive technology, including Steinnmetz and others. [See References especially #I, 2, and 5]
See also ID# 296

##### Industrial Significance:
See also notes ID# 296

##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:
See also notes ID# 296

##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
'Fractional Horsepower Electric Motors', Cyril Veinott, McGraw Hill New York, 1948
'Rewinding Small Motors', Daniel Braymer and C.C. Roe, McGraw Hill, 1932
'Theory and Application of Capacitor-Start Induction Motors',  G. L. Oliver, Bachelor Thesis ,University of Toronto, Session 1951-52 
'Modern Refrigeration and Air Conditioning', Electric Motors, Chapter 7, Andrew Althouse and Carl Turnquist, Goodheart-Wilcox, 1960 
'A course in Electrical Engineering, Volume II, Alternating Current', Chester Dawes, McGraw Hill, 1934, Starting single Phase Induction Motors, P. 362.
'The Fractional Horsepower Motor and its Impact on Canadian Society and Culture', G. Leslie Oliver, Material History Review, Vol. 43, Journal National Museum of Science and Technology, 1996.
'Refrigeration Catalogue', Marshall Refrigeration Co. Ltd., Toronto, Cat. 30

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports

