| **HHCC Accession No. 2006.216** |**HHCC Classification Code:  16.07-8**|
| ----------- | ----------- |
##### Description:
An 11 inch, narrow, bearing scraper, with 3 inch blade, designed for 'modern bearings', with black, turned, wooden handle and steel furl, an early 20th century tool for hand fitting journal bearings, 'VLC4BK' CLEV'D.O., Circa 1930
##### Group:
16.07 Electric Motors - Installation, Test and Repair

##### Make:
Marked 'VLC4BK' CLEV'D.O.,

##### Manufacturer:
Unspecified

##### Model:
Unspecified

##### Serial No.:
Unspecified

##### Size:
11 inch long, 1 inch dia. handle.

##### Weight:
4  ozs.

##### Circa:
1930

##### Rating:
Exhibit, education, and research quality, illustrating early 20th century scraping tools for fitting brass journal bearings.

##### Patent Date/Number:


##### Provenance:
From York County (York Region) Ontario, once rich agricultural hinterlands, attracting early settlement in the last years of the 18th century. Located on the north slopes of the Oak Ridges Moraine, within 20 miles of Toronto, the County would also attract early ex-urban development, to become a wealthy market place for the emerging household and consumer technologies of the early and mid 20th century. 

This artifact was discovered in the 1950's in the used stock of T. H. Oliver, Refrigeration and Electric Sales and Service, Aurora, Ontario, an early worker in the field of agricultural, industrial and consumer technology.

##### Type and Design:
An 11 inch, narrow bearing scraper, 
3 inch steel blade, 
Turned black wooden handle and steel furl, 
Designed for sharpening on an oil stone.

##### Construction:


##### Material:


##### Special Features:


##### Accessories:


##### Capacities:


##### Performance Characteristics:


##### Operation:


##### Control and Regulation:


##### Targeted Market Segment:


##### Consumer Acceptance:


##### Merchandising:


##### Market Price:


##### Technological Significance:
An early, 20th century, journal bearing fitting tool telling stories of its time: 
The crude hand technology on which the fitting of bearings depended in the early years of the century
The need for tools which would yield much greater precision in bearing fitting required for newly emerging equipment, operating at higher speeds and requiring close operating tolerances - especially electric motors, Much of the market for new home, commercial and industrial technology would depend on the development of the electric motor, for its motive power  [See ID # 341]

##### Industrial Significance:
Commonly used in automotive repair work, the bearing scraper would be commonly found in the tool box of  the automotive mechanic in the 1920's and 30's

##### Socio-economic Significance:


##### Socio-cultural Significance:


##### Donor:
G. Leslie Oliver, The T. H. Oliver HVACR Collection

##### HHCC Storage Location:


##### Tracking:


##### Bibliographic References:
Garage Supply Co. Limited, Cat. No. 20, Toronto, Hamilton and Bellville, P. 136,  1936

##### Notes:


##### Related Reports:

